Chapter 6
Operating Environments
This chapter describes how to operate the ZOLL Ventilator outside of a typical hospital
environment. The types of environments that we describe are:
• Harsh environments -- prehospital and transport
• Hazardous environments -- in the presence of chemical and/or biological toxins
• MRI environments -- during MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) treatment

Using the ZOLL Ventilator in Harsh Environments
The ZOLL Ventilator operates in harsh prehospital environments and during air and ground
transport. In order to safely manage the patient, you must understand the operating
characteristics of the ventilator and diligently monitor the patient and device in these
environments. The unit continuously monitors environmental conditions (temperature and
ambient pressure) and when it detects extreme environments, the unit alerts you with a Low
Priority alarm which defines the operating condition and prompts your actions. Low Priority
alarms are advisory and you should remember that the device is operating as designed.

Airborne Particulates
Under normal operating conditions, the internal 2-stage filtration system protects the gas flow
path from particulates entrained through the Fresh Gas/Emergency Air Intake. However, when
operating in areas where fine dust or dirt is airborne due to wind or vehicle movement, you
should use a disposable bacterial/viral filter to preserve the internal filter. Using disposable
filters prevents you from having to change the ventilators internal filters. Visually inspect the
filter for dust/dirt build up for extended operation in harsh environments, you should change the
filter as it becomes dirty.


ZOLL Ventilator Operator’s Guide

6-1

OPERATING ENVIRONMENTS
The primary effect of entrained particles is on the operation of the flow pneumotach used to
control the gas delivered to the patient. Dirt on the pneumotach screens affects the unit’s
calibration. Cleaning the screens requires a biomedical technician to disassemble the device
and ultrasonically clean the screens. Using a filter in dusty environments prevents having to
remove the unit from service for cleaning. In addition to using the filter, you can also keep the
unit in the soft case, which will protect the unit case and the LCD from being scratched or
damaged. It is also easier to clean the padded case following use in a dusty/dirty environment
than the device.

Extreme Temperature Environments
Traditional transport ventilators typically operate from 0 to 40C (32 to 104F). The ZOLL
Ventilator can operate over the range of -25 to 49C (-13 to 120F) during emergency
situations.

Operating at High Temperatures
When operating the ventilator at high temperatures, you may observe alarm conditions
associated with Li-ION battery performance:
Charging -- If operating using external power, the unit may issue an alarm when the battery
reaches its high charge temperature limit of 45 C.
Discharging -- If operating using external power, the unit may issue an alarm when the battery
reaches its high discharge temperature limit of 49 C.
Compliance is a physical characteristic of the ventilator that varies with temperature. The
circuit becomes more compliant as the temperature rises. The ZOLL ventilator allows you to
increase the compliance value when operating in hot environments.
When operating at high temperatures, you should remove the unit from its padded case, which
allows the unit to pass heat into the surrounding environment.

Operating at Low Temperatures
When operating the ventilator at low temperatures, you may observe alarm conditions
associated with Li-ION battery performance:
Charging -- If operating using external power, the unit may issue an alarm when the battery
reaches its low charge temperature limit of 0 C.
Discharging -- If operating using external power, the unit may issue an alarm when the battery
reaches its low discharge temperature limit of -25 C.
Compliance is a physical characteristic of the ventilator that varies with temperature. The
circuit becomes less compliant as the temperature drops. The ZOLL ventilator allows you to
decrease the compliance value when operating in cold environments.
Valve operating performance can be affected by extremely low temperatures. Consequently, at
low temperatures, you should monitor the patient to ensure that the patient is receiving
adequate tidal volume and monitor the patient’s SpO2 readings.
When operating at low temperatures, you can improve performance by operating the unit in the
padded case, which insulates the unit and allows it to retain heat generated by the compressor,
circuit boards, and AC/DC Power Supply.

6-2



Altitude
The ZOLL 731 Series Ventilator is designed to operate from -610 to 7620 meters (-2,000 to
25,000 feet). An absolute barometric pressure sensor monitors ambient pressure and the unit
uses this information to continuously correct the output of the device to maintain the ventilation
parameters. When the altitude is > 25,000 feet, the unit activates a Low Priority alarm. When
this occurs, you should monitor the peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) and adjust the tidal volume
to maintain the PIP and monitor breath sounds and chest excursion to assure the unit maintains
adequate ventilation. The tidal volume increases as altitude increases, so you should look to
prevent over-pressurization of the lung when the altitude increases beyond 25,000 feet. If
changes are made above 25,000 feet, you should revert to the initial settings once operation
resumes in the compensated range (the LED will turn from yellow to green).

Warning!

The unit is not intended for hyperbaric operation. Use in a hyperbaric chamber can
result in harm to the patient and/or damage to the device.


ZOLL Ventilator Operator’s Guide


6-3

OPERATING ENVIRONMENTS

Rain and Snow
You should prevent exposing the unit to rain or snow. Use the optional padded case that can be
purchased with the ZOLL Ventilator to protect the 731 Series Ventilator from rain and snow.
The unit is capable of operating in these conditions if you keep the device in the padded case
and use the rain flap that is provided with the padded case. The padded case and rain flap
prevent rain and snow from puddling on any of the device’s surfaces. In cases of driving rain,
where water could possibly enter the unit’s compressor, you can use a bacterial/viral filter to
protect the compressor inlet.

Using the ZOLL Ventilator in Hazardous Environments
You can use the ZOLL Ventilator in environments where chemical and/or biological toxins are
present. To do this safely, all gas delivered to the patient comes from either a pressurized
medical-grade oxygen source and/or filtered ambient air entrained through the
Fresh Gas/Emergency Air Intake. You can chose between a bacterial/viral filter and a
chemical/biological filter based on the direction of the Medical Control Officer.
To prevent the patient from breathing contaminated ambient air in the event of a ventilator
failure, the unit contains an internal anti-asphyxia valve that allows the patient to inspire gas
through the external filter. While this design assures that no contaminated gas reaches the
patient, you are required to ensure that nothing blocks the input of the external filter.

Warning!

The Medical Control Officer and/or Incident Commander should determine which, if
any, external filter is used based on the potential hazard.

Warning!

You must ensure that nothing blocks the inlet of the external filter; failure to do so could
prevent the patient from breathing and cause an ventilator failure.

Fresh Gas/Emergency Air Intake

Bacterial/Viral Filter

Chemical/Biological Filter

Hazardous Environment Filters

6-4



Bacterial/Viral Filter Use
You can use Bacterial/Viral (B/V) filters in environments where the patient is at risk from cross
contamination or airborne pathogens. When used in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, these filters can help prevent inhalation of infectious matter. In dusty
environments, you can also use the B/V filters to prevent entrainment of particulate matter that
could affect the ventilators pneumatic components. To use a bacterial/viral filter, insert the
filter's male 22 mm conical fitting into the Fresh Gas/Emergency Air Intake.
Caution

If filters have been exposed to biological matter, dispose of them following the Universal
Precaution procedures for your facility.

Chemical/Biological Filter Use
The ZOLL 731 Series Ventilator is designed to allow attachment of chemical/biological filter/
canister (type C2A11) for use in contaminated environments. The Fresh Gas/Emergency Air
Intake fitting allows for attachment of standard Rd 40 x 1/7 threads. A complete description of
this standard can be found in BS EN 148-1:1999 Respiratory protective devices - Threads for
face pieces.

Check Valve on Breathing Circuit when in Hazardous Environments
When operating in a Hazardous Situation where a chemical/biological filter is in use, you
should use a Check Valve (REF 704-0700-01) to prevent hazardous gas from entering the
patient’s breathing circuit. The exhalation valve on the breathing circuit is not adequate to
protect patients if they rapidly inhale/exhale as the valve may not fully close in time to prevent
hazardous gas entrainment. Also, if the PEEP is set low, patients may inhale faster than the flow
is delivered which could cause hazardous gas entrainment. Consequently, a Check Valve is
required to protect patients.

1. A 3M C2A1 canister (3M St. Paul, MN) was used in our validation testing to represent the class of filters
generically known as C2A1 under the NSN number 4240-01-361-1319. These tests confirmed the
performance of the ventilator when operating with these devices as a class. Use of the 3M canister does not
constitute endorsement or recommendation of the 3M device. Use and selection of the appropriate filter
should always be under the direction of the Incident Commander.


ZOLL Ventilator Operator’s Guide

6-5

OPERATING ENVIRONMENTS

Warning!

The unit is shipped with both the pediatric/adult and infant/pediatric single limb
circuits. A Check Valve (704-0700-01) is required with these breathing circuits when
operating in a hazardous environment. The correct mating of the Check Valve with the
breathing circuit is shown below. Operators who anticipate use in these environments
should also stock the Check Valve.

Check Valve Connection To Breathing Circuit

6-6




Using the ZOLL Ventilator in an MRI Environment
You can use ZOLL’s MRI-compliant EMV+® and Eagle II™ ventilators in an
MRI environment while securely mounted to the ZOLL MRI Roll Stand (REF 816-0731-01)
with the Aluminum IV Support Arm (REF 820-0124-00).
To securely mount the ventilator, tighten the knob on the back plate of the roll stand to hold the
ventilator in position, then lock the roll stand wheels (we also recommend that you tether the
rolling stand in place):

731 Series Ventilator Mounted On MRI Rolling Stand With IV Support Arm

Before using the ventilator in an MRI environment, it is important that you read and understand
all warnings in the “Ferromagnetic Equipment” Section of Chapter 1.


ZOLL Ventilator Operator’s Guide

6-7

OPERATING ENVIRONMENTS

Warning!

Use only ZOLL’s EMV+ and Eagle II Ventilators marked with the MR symbol in the
MRI environment.

Caution

The use of longer breathing circuits may increase the risk of self-triggering ventilator breaths.
Reducing the pressure trigger sensitivity may solve this problem.

6-8